feat: ✨ add post on using pytask for workflow management (#306)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-pytask/index.qmd

---
title: "Why pytask for Python workflow management"
description: |

>   Managing a data processing workflow, which is the steps to take from raw input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Managing a data processing workflow, which is the series of steps taken from raw input
```

process the data, we also want to achieve automated reproducibility. For that,
we need a tool that can track the various initial raw inputs, the intermediate
outputs and inputs, and the final outputs. So the question is:

*Which tool should we use to formally track data lineage and automate the
reproducible generation of our data packages?*

## Decision drivers

Aside from our general drivers as described in our [design
principles](https://design.seedcase-project.org), such as having good
documentation, being actively maintained, and open source, we also have other
drivers:

- Doesn't require a strict folder and file structure to work.
- Is CLI-based or only requires using Python code. Ideally, it should be a
  Python library that only requires adding specific decorators to functions or
  tracks functions in some formal way that would form a graph (i.e. the output
  of one goes into the input of another).
- Fairly lightweight, meaning we want something that has what we need, but not
  much more.
- Ideally is agnostic to the computing environment, meaning it should work on a
  local machine without needing to be deployed on a server or cloud platform.

>   This is important because we often develop data packages for health data in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is important because we often develop data packages for health data on a
```

  Linux server (for legal and privacy reasons).

## Considered options

We used this [list of pipeline
tools](https://github.com/pditommaso/awesome-pipeline) as a starting point to
finding and reviewing the available options.

While the list is quite large, the vast majority of tools are not relevant to
us. They are either focused heavily on cloud platforms (via a UI), no longer
maintained (explicitly archived), very old or untouched for years, or they no
longer exist (or at least the URL is dead). From the remaining tools, many have
documentation that is poorly organised, difficult to read, and/or hard to assess

> whether it fit our needs or not. Of those that do have good documentation, many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documentation that is poorly organised, difficult to read, and/or makes it hard to assess
whether they fit our needs. Of those that do have good documentation, many
```

> of those are built for needs that are much more complex and extensive compared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are built for needs that are much more complex and extensive compared
```

> to ours. For example, they included more advanced data lineage features,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ours. For example, they include more advanced data lineage features,
```

deployment, container-based workflows, and other advanced features that we do
not need. After this initial quick review of the available options and excluding
the tools that did not meet our needs and drivers, these were the tools that
remained that could fit our needs:

- [Apache Hamilton](https://hamilton.apache.org)
- [PipeFunc](https://pipefunc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- [PyTask](https://pytask-dev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)

There are a few tools that are *almost* what we need, but don't quite fit our
requirements. These are the tools we didn't consider:

- Both [Prefect](https://www.prefect.io/) and [Dagster](https://dagster.io/) are
  common and widely-used data orchestration/workflow tools. They are both very
  feature-rich, but a lot of those features we don't need. They are both heavily
  focused on orchestration, especially through the use of a UI. And they're both
  built by companies that sell a cloud-based version of their tools. A lot of
  their docs and examples are focused around using it via their platform and UI,

>   which makes it difficult to determine how we could apply it for our use-cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  which makes it difficult to determine how we could apply it to our use cases.
```

  For example, it's extremely difficult to find how to "just run all the tasks"
  on the command-line or as Python code. Most of the docs talk about opening up
  the UI to interact with, visualize, and run the workflow.

### Apache Hamilton

[Apache Hamilton](https://hamilton.apache.org) a general framework for building
data processing pipelines rather than a generic workflow management system (like

> the other two options). It's main focus is on tracking transformations to data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the other two options). Its main focus is on tracking transformations to data
```

  and well-maintained open source projects. This means there is at least some
  level of maintenance commitment and support for the project, more than the
  other two options.
- Has extensive support for many different types of integrations and tools, so
  there's a strong likelihood that it could integrate well with what we use and
  need.
- Like pytask below, task dependencies are defined by naming the parameter of a
  function for a downstream task with the same name as the function from the
  upstream tasks. This makes it quite easy to scan function signatures and
  identify what they depend on.
:::::
::::: {.column}
#### Drawbacks

- The documentation is a bit difficult to navigate. For example, the "Getting
  Started" section is a bit short and starts off with explaining why to use it
  and listing common questions about it and answers to them.
- It primarily seems to operate on data columns, and transformations to those
  columns, rather than whole data objects or on files. The final output of the
  workflow requires listing the columns that are in the final output. This
  organization may work well when column level tracking is important and when

>   there aren't that many columns in the end. But for our type of use-cases,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  there aren't that many columns in the end. But for our type of use cases,
```

  where datasets often have thousands of columns at the end, this would be quite

>   difficult to manage and develop. Though it does seem to also output whole data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  difficult to manage and develop. It does seem to also output whole data
```

  frames, but it isn't clear from the docs what that means compared to the
  column-level tracking.

> - Requires setting up a "builder" to explicitly list list the Python modules to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Requires setting up a "builder" to explicitly list the Python modules to
```

  search in and the type of database backend used (e.g. Pandas). This adds some
  extra work to develop and maintain, as the tasks need to be defined twice
  (once as the function itself and once in the builder).
- At the time of reviewing this, [Polars isn't well
  supported](https://hamilton.apache.org/reference/result-builders/Polars/),
  which is what we [decided on using](/why-polars-for-data-cleaning/index.qmd).
- Task outputs are tracked in a cache folder, which appears to be in a SQL
  database (it isn't clear from the docs). This makes it a bit harder to
  manually review and inspect the task outputs.
:::::
:::

### pytask

[pytask](https://pytask-dev.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is a Python-based,

> general-purpose workflow management system. It tracks generic "tasks", which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
general-purpose workflow management system. It tracks generic "tasks", including which
```

tasks need to run first and what outputs from one task are needed as inputs for

> another. Built mainly from the desire for tracking data processing steps when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
another. It was built mainly from a desire to track data processing steps when
```

  of the workflow.
- Has a command-line interface.
- Requires organising Python code into a Python package, which is good as you
  can follow basic Python packaging practices and use existing tooling for that.
  While not required, their convention is to name files with `task_` at the
  start to indicate that they contain tasks, similar to how pytest uses `test_`
  for test files.
- A task is defined as any Python function starting with `task_`, which mimics
  how pytest defines tests (`test_`), which is a familiar convention for Python
  users. Can also use the decorator `@pytask` for more control over task names
  and other features.
- Tasks can produce any output, including a file.
- Outputs of a task are usually stored as a file in a special "build" folder
  (default is `bld/`). This makes it easier to also mentally/conceptually track
  outputs and their dependencies, as you can just look in the build folder (or
  the `pytask.lock` file). But a "data catalog" (a dictionary of any type of
  tasks and their outputs) can also be used to track outputs, especially for
  tasks that don't produce files.
- Has different, formal ways of tracking input and output for tasks, either with

>   parameter name (`produces`) or with type hints (using `Annotated`). Type hints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Has several formal ways of tracking task inputs and outputs, either with a
  parameter name (`produces`) or with type hints (using `Annotated`). Type hints
```

  are generally a fantastic system to use, so incorporating them into a task
  workflow is a great feature as type checkers can be used to check the
  workflow.

> - Any function parameter where the name matches the name of a task will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any function parameter whose name matches the name of a task will be
```

  tracked as a dependency, meaning the output of that task will be the input to

>   the task with the parameter name. This is a very intuitive way of tracking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the task with the matching parameter. This is a very intuitive way of tracking
```

  dependencies, as the function signature itself is used to track the workflow.

>   The input to that parameter must point to the build folder.

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear to me (which parameter?)

- Can output a graph of the workflow as an image, to make it easier to visually
  see and reason about the workflow.
:::::
::::: {.column}
#### Drawbacks

- Of the three, it seems it is the least widely used, at least based on the
  number of stars on GitHub, which of course isn't an accurate measure of usage.
  So there may be less people using it, less help and support, and less examples

>   and resources online.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  So there may be fewer people using it, less help and support, and fewer examples
  and resources online.
```

:::::
:::

### PipeFunc

[PipeFunc](https://pipefunc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), like pytask, is a
Python-based workflow management system. It also tracks generic "tasks" and

> isn't built for a specific domain, though they do describe work doing scientific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
isn't built for a specific domain, though its documentation does describe applications in scientific
```

data processing and analysis.

::: {.columns}
::::: {.column}
#### Benefits

- Uses decorators (`@pipefunc`) to track tasks and list dependencies.
- Has features for tracking CPU and memory usage of tasks.
- Has some level of support for parallelizing tasks.
:::::
::::: {.column}
#### Drawbacks

- Documentation is not very extensive, a bit unclear, and not well organised (or
  at least, difficult to understand how it is organised). They depend heavily on

>   linking to other projects using PipeFunc to use as examples of how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  linking to other projects using PipeFunc as examples of how to use it.
```

  While examples are useful, they shouldn't be the main way to explain and

>   walk-through how to use the tool. Likewise, they have a "concepts" page that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  walk through how to use the tool. Likewise, they have a "concepts" page that
```

  is more of a "how-to" page rather than, semantically, a page that explains the

>   concepts/design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is more of a "how-to" page than a page that explains the
  concepts/design semantically.
```

  differently styled text and formatting. For instance, there are a lot of
  different colours, interactive elements, and call-out boxes, which can make
  mentally parsing the content more difficult and tiring.
- Listing tasks is done through a combination of using the decorators and
  listing them in a `Pipeline()` function, which is a bit more work to keep
  track of and maintain as there are *two* places to define tasks.
- Dependent tasks are defined in both the decorator of the upstream task and in
  the function signature of the downstream task. If the name of the parameter
  changes in the downstream task, it needs to be updated in the upstream task's
  decorator, which is a bit more work and less intuitive than just using the
  function signature to track dependencies.
- It isn't clear from the documentation where the outputs of the tasks are
  stored and how they are cached/tracked.
:::::
:::

## Decision outcome

We decided on using pytask for managing the steps of how we process and generate
our data packages. Apache Hamilton was a close second but it was too specific to
data transformations rather than more generic tasks, e.g. when we process

> metadata or fetch from APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our data packages. Apache Hamilton was a close second but it was geared more toward
data transformations than generic tasks, such as processing
metadata or fetching from APIs.
```

### Consequences

- Because pytask is less widely used than the other options, there may be less

>   support and resources available online. Which means we may take longer to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  support and resources available online. This means we may take longer to
```

  figure out issues and learn how to use it.

> - It's general-purpose nature, while being a benefit right now, may be too

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Its general-purpose nature, while being a benefit right now, may be too
```
